Welcome to the future of payroll and
workforce management insights by hr.com.
Your go-to resource for insights into
payroll and workforce management. From
navigating compliance and technology
trends to exploring the latest in global
payroll solutions, we're here to keep
you ahead of the curve. Join us as we
dive into the forces reshaping payroll
and share practical strategies to
optimize your workforce management.
Let's get started.
Well, hello everyone and welcome to this
latest episode of Future of Payroll and
Workforce Management, a podcast here at
hr.com where I am your host Brent
Skinner and I do several things here at
HR.com, advisory boards, uh hosting this
podcast, writing for the for the blog,
newsletters, all sorts of things. And
I've been in the space for a long time.
But enough about me. Uh today's episode
is as always about my guest. And my
guest today is Jim Jansen, who is CEO
and founder of Traction. And uh a lot of
people watching today will know you,
Jim, from many of your past lives. And
uh really happy to have you today.
>> Well, thank you for having me. I greatly
appreciate it.
>> Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Awesome. Awesome. When
when you said yes, uh I was like score.
So anyway,
>> well anybody know knows me knows I like
to talk. So
>> that's awesome that you know that and
that's what what we like to do here on
the podcast is talk about HCM. Um so
you've been in the space for a long time
and and I like to and we have a really
interesting topic today. We're going to
talk about AI obviously because who
isn't talking about AI? Um our title for
this is from AI curiosity to operational
traction. what comes next for work tech
and I think we're going to have a lot to
say about that but I'd like to ask all
my guests at the outset of these
episodes is uh what got you into the
world of work and what's your passion?
What gets you going every day um uh
ripping and roaring in this space Jim?
>> Yeah. So I'll try to keep it as short as
possible but um so anybody else that
knows me knows that I'm I'm 69 about 280
pounds. I played basketball in
university. Obviously, I wasn't good
enough to go pro. So, I did what most
people do. I went into payroll. No, I I
went into finance. I was working up on
Wall Street for JP Morgan Bank. And a
little payroll company out of South
Florida reached out to me called
Ultimate Software. And I like to say
that, you know, no, nobody chooses to go
into payroll. It chooses you. But I saw
this tremendous opportunity
uh to get in on the ground floor with
this company that uh you know there's
there's a saying that there's uh the
only thing that's sure in life is uh
death and taxes. And I thought this was
a pretty close second to taxes. So
So I got into payroll and HR and
honestly it's been an unbelievable
uh career and opportunity. And it's that
that one thing that no matter what
happens in the world, no matter what
happens in the economy, people have to
get paid and people have to be managed
and people have to be supported. And so
that's where I am in HCM.
>> Oh, that's that's awesome. Yeah. And uh
you know, a lot of folks in this in this
space, a lot of people watching today
probably have fond memories of Ultimate
Software. And of course they later um
merged with Kronos to become UKG about 5
years ago or so now. Really exciting
stuff. And you know it's funny you
mentioned that you know nobody chooses
payroll payroll chooses you. Uh we have
actually done episodes of this podcast
in the past this year where more than
one person we talked about how there is
really kind of no real career path
defined career path you know in academia
and that sort of thing for payroll and
that somebody actually said that they
said you know payroll does you don't
choose payroll payroll chooses you so we
named the podcast episode that so that's
so funny you said that. Um, now now tell
me a little bit about te tell us a
little bit about traction which is your
new venture traction.ai and this is
going to be a really good segue into our
topic today.
>> Sure. So, um, so as most people know,
when you know about four years ago, I I
was on the executive leadership team at
Day Force and had a good run there for
five or six years and I just decided um
that it was maybe time for me to step
out and look to do something else. Uh so
so I did and I I kind of semi-retired
and uh or maybe re semi-retreaded not
retired but I semi-retired and I was
primarily focused on working with uh
private equity venture capital and
investment banks on devestatures
carveouts
um you know moving into new markets and
and that was keeping me busy enough that
I was okay with that and everybody kept
saying Jim come on there's you you got
to come back in the industry like what?
You're not going to be able to you're
too young to retire or whatever, which I
don't know about that, but I was
flattered. U and and I always said if I
could find something that I could get
passionate about, right? I'm a pretty
passionate guy if it's something I
believe in that I could get passionate
about that would be that would move the
dial and make a difference in the
industry. I didn't want to be another
learning management system or recruiting
system or whatever. So there had to be a
blue ocean there where there was an
opportunity that I would I would
potentially lace my cleats back up and
and get back in the industry. And then
as luck would have it with we all know
WFM is the most complicated part of all
human capital management followed
closely by payroll right the two that
don't get the they get the least amount
of respect but the most critical.
>> Yeah. Um, but they're really complicated
and all you have to do is look at look
at how many HR vendors there are, how
few payroll vendors there are, and how
few WFM vendors there are. Good ones
anyhow. And so I'm looking at this and I
there's this consolidation taking place,
right? Kronos, the most widely partnered
time and attendance solution on the
market, merges with Ultimate. Now
they're a competitor to everybody
they're partnered with. Uh, Day Force
started off as a WFM solution, builds
out a full HCM suite. Nobody's going to
partner with them really for WFM. Swipe
clock gets acquired by Iris. Workforce
software gets acquired by ADP. And it
was like this parting of the seas. And
there's this opportunity
for a a meaningful mid-market and
enterprise WFM solution that is built on
current technology and can solve for
those challenges. And when you look at
the old guard day force, the most
current technology stack, it's already
this year 15 years old. If you look at
dimension or UKG Pro, it's,
you know, 20 plus years old with a
prettier face on it, but it's still
there's a lot of functional debt and
technical debt in those products. And so
I we just saw an opportunity to create a
product that was on contemporary
technology that could seamlessly
integrate in with other solutions that
focused on getting punch data. Right.
Right. That I saw a recent study that
said that 80% of all payroll errors can
be traced back to bad uh time
collection.
>> And so we thought there was a great
opportunity there and um and so that's
what we did.
>> Yeah. You know, it's really interesting.
Um,
it's, you know, there's some, so I've
noticed this in the work that first of
all, you're right, workforce management
obviously the most complicated, uh, area
of HCM and, uh, along with payroll sort
of getting the least, as a Rody
Dangerfield would say, respect, right?
>> And maybe that's changing. Um, you know,
there's
there is an interesting sort of, you
know, for the longest time we're working
towards sort of endto-end solutions. And
this is this might be a good segue to
what we're going to talk about, but I
just want to get it out there anyways.
We talked about endtoend solutions for
the longest time. It seemed for some
reason it just became sort of the north
star. We have to create a a full suite
for HCM from one vendor blah blah blah.
And um, sure it was a a worthy goal. I
mean it was an interesting sort of you
know probably you know I'm not a
computer coder but it was probably
really interesting for the various
companies sort of look working to kind
of achieve that right but what we've
seen is just a persistence of demand and
uh frankly need for specialized point
solutions and talent acquisition has
been one of those areas right um and and
payroll is another and workforce
management is another one.
>> Yep. I I think you're absolutely right.
And I think that look, I I've been in
this world for 30 plus years, 35 years,
and at Ultimate, we sold a single
unified solution, end to end. Uh at Day
Force, same thing, single solution, end
to end. And there was certainly value in
that. And and the idea was is that uh
it's, you know, one throat to choke, one
back to pat. And in the midmarket
that was really successful. Probably 85%
of all businesses were full product
suite sales. In the enterprise it was
not. It was more best of breed bespoke
solutions because they had the resources
to be able to manage and aggregate the
data from maybe I'm using workday as my
HCM solution. I'm using UKG for my gross
to net. I'm using day force for time.
I'm using ISIMS for recruitment and
onboarding and the enterprise could do
that. Well, now that's not reserved just
for the larger enterprise customers. Now
down in the midm market because of
technology where it is now I should be
able to buy a best of breed workforce
management system and the best of breed
gross to net engine and the best of
breed HR and they should theoretically
all communicate together. I use a a weak
example but I use the example of stereo
equipment. I can buy different brands of
speakers and uh turntable and stereo
head and power conditioner and it all
plugs together and works as if it's all
the same brand. And that's really the
utopia because every vendor is really
good at at least one piece of what they
do. If you candidly, if you look at
Workday, they're really good at global
HR. maybe not as good at payroll, not as
good at WFM, not as good as learning.
They have those to check the box and
round out the offering. But if I really
want the best, I'm going to go and and
select individual bespoke solutions
where 100% of their focus is on that one
feature and then they work to make sure
it can seamlessly integrate with other
solutions.
>> So, so that this is a segue I've been
looking for. So one of one of the
questions that I have for you today is
uh so first the question is you know
where do you see the biggest gap today
between AI experimentation and
operational value inside organizations
and I guess sort of a correlary to that
in my head anyway and I could be
completely wrong let's be honest but um
what I'm seeing there is you know is AI
is AI sort of uh helping with that uh
the ability to sort of put in put an
amalgamation of bespoke solutions
together.
>> Well, I think it is, but it's all how
you handle the data on the back end and
how you handle the implementation of it.
And I think, you know, leaders leaders
tend to frame AI agents as like cheaper
humans or or you know, things to do
very specific strengths and limits and
all. And I think if we can get away from
that and look at it more globally
because what happens is now is most AI
projects within organizations and within
solutions are uh very bespoke uh they're
kind of um experimentations and stuff
rather than kind of a more uh
encompassing
look at that. And so at the end of the
day, if you if you redefine
work as decisions and not tasks, like
the you know, you've got decision making
under constraints, right? So is is this
punch valid? Does the schedule violate
labor rules? Can we approve this
exception without risk? Um who who needs
to be notified now? Right? But if if we
can get the AI agents to collaborate on
that like to own repeatable
rulesheavy decisions and I think that's
the it's like coding. Coding is very
binary. It's option A or option B. It's
rule one or true or false, right? It's
very binary. And when you can clearly
define those rules, AI can be uh
phenomenal for that, right? to escalate
ambiguous or high-risisk cases to
continually to continually monitor
conditions that humans can't watch 247,
right? It's great for doing that kind of
stuff. Where it's struggles and you have
to have humans involved is when you get
into policy interpretation or edge cases
or final authority on, you know,
regulated outcomes. Like our philosophy
is we're never going to use AI to make
decisions where accountability has to be
there. I can't hold an AI agent
accountable. And so we like to call it
assistive intelligence. It can comb
through all the data. It can spot trends
and irregularities and those sort of
things and and make me aware of what's
going on in my data and in my systems
and guide me through making my decision.
But at the end of the day, I have to be
accountable for that and make that
decision.
>> You know, it's interesting, right? You
can't take an AI agent to court. Right.
>> Right. Exactly.
>> Yeah. I you know what's funny is that um
uh you talk about sort of you know the
different uses for agentic AI, you know,
where you would you or a you know AI
sort of in assistive decision making but
not sort of for accountability related
things, right? uh something that needs
to be, you know, bam, has to be right at
the end of the day, right? You use
humans for that. And that I like that
philosophy. Uh it reminds me of a
conversation I had with a a fellow
earlier this year. It's on the podcast
where we talked about um AI and payroll.
Uh just to talk about payroll for a
moment now, right? Um apparently, you
know, we all know that AI does what you
know what's called hallucinating. Well,
kind of it'll make up answers sometimes.
>> And and I learned that that is actually
a feature, not a bug. That's that is not
like a glitch or a mistake that the AI
is doing. It's actually part of how the
way it learns is it's looking for that.
Um it's excuse me, its creators,
probably the AI itself. you know, to get
a little bit dystopian Skynet here, but
at some point, you know, it's it's it's
actually kind of looking for us to
correct it or to kind of or maybe to
provide feedback, right? And so we're so
and and and part of that is that the AI
is not designed to produce uh a clear
concrete black or white correct answer
necessarily to things. That's that's why
LLMs are so useful, right, for writing
this kind of stuff because there's a lot
of sort of leeway in that sort of thing.
So that's a big long way of saying that,
you know, to to to to leave payroll to
AI to sort of produce, you know, what's
been called autonomous payroll is that
might first of all what might be driving
autonomous payroll, something other than
AI, right? A but B also that that a that
would be a bad or an ill-advised sort of
uh application for AI. But when you talk
about you know um uh enhancing the the
ESS experience for the employee uh when
it comes to payroll helping them
understand their paycheck better these
sorts of things. Um
>> that's a great use for AI. So, I just
wanted to get that out there is that,
you know, that's that's what you're
saying is I've been hearing it elsewhere
as well.
>> Yeah. And I think we we have to
understand what we're doing. AI, you
know, it's machine learning and
artificial intelligence and all, but at
the end of the day, you're teaching it
what the rules are and then it operates
within those rules. So, if you teach it
flawed
information, it's going to come up with
flawed, right? We all remember back a
couple of years ago uh it was Google's
AI engine when it was asked to produce
images of famous people in history. They
were all uh people of color. George
Washington was generated as a person of
color. Well, we obviously know that
wasn't right.
>> Yeah.
>> But there was somehow there was uh a
bias or misinformation introduced and
they lost $95 billion in valuation
overnight as a result of that. Obviously
that's been resolved.
>> Yeah.
>> So yeah, I I think that um kind of like
where the rule where the rules are
emphatic AI can be emphatic where it's
not it's going to take some liberties
and we have to train it and coach it and
get it through that. So but the areas
where you know if you're using instead
of like um uh like jobs it's more
autonomy tiers like what are the things
that AI can do what obviously observe is
one where it can monitor and report
information recommend it can look at
what's taking place and we used to call
it prescriptive analytics right it can
recommend actions maybe that should be
taken it can execute on things with
guard rails if it's clearly defined and
then it it can escalate things and or
hand it off to somebody. I think where
people get into problems and this is why
I think everybody says, "Oh, AI is going
to take everybody's jobs." I don't think
it will. I think it's it's like it's
this
assistant that can guide me to help me
make decisions. And if I know what I'm
doing and I know my business, I can I
can tell whether it is hallucinating. I
can tell if what it's doing is is wrong.
Uh and I can also glean from it what's
right. I think the rub that we're having
now with people and some you know
college students are finding this out is
when they don't know what the AI is
producing like they don't know
understand that they take it at face
value and they run with it and it could
potentially be wrong. There could be
cases where it's not right. So, I think
you still have to have a a thorough
knowledge or understanding of what it is
you're doing, what payroll should be
doing, right? Because again, it's to
it's to automate and help you and assist
you in what you're doing in your role.
>> Yeah. Yeah. In the time we have left,
um, I want to ask you how how does AI
make scheduling better? How does it how
does it help with workforce management?
Maybe with uh other areas of WFM uh you
know uh time time and attendance
tracking these sorts of things.
>> Well, some of the basic foundational
things it can do is like analyzing
demand patterns, right? Historical
volumes, seasonality, weather events. I
have a a friend of mine who is the COO
at um uh Tron, the golf course
management company, and they do all
their planning based off of Farmers
Almanac weather predictions and things
like that. So, it can do things like
that. It can match labor supply with the
demand in real time. It can um you know
like balance business needs with
employee preferences and constraints.
All of those clearly defined in the
system. It can match that up. I can do
to uh you know if I'm trying to define a
shift for um you know a medical
organization where I I need two RNs and
I need an LPN and I need a this it can
look at qualifications and can suggest
what the makeup of that team should look
like or that shift what the that
staffing should look like. Um, it can
predict hourly staffing needs for
overtime and understaffing and labor law
potential labor law violations, flag
overtime
uh challenges for the frontline worker.
Imagine that I I pick up my phone and I
say, you know, hey, traction, when when
am I scheduled to work next? And it
says, oh, you're scheduled Friday from
noon to 4. Oh, I've got a conflict. Who
else could cover my shift for me? and it
can automate putting my shift out to bid
or hey traction I'd like to pick up
another shift this week are there any
available I can grab that won't put me
into overtime or something of that
nature so I for the front end you know
the frontline worker I think it's to
just make it more conversational and
interacting with the system to figure
out when I work and when I when I might
be able to pick up additional shifts or
what some conflicts I might have, how
much have I made so far, things like
that. And the idea is to um just
automate as much of that as possible. in
on the administration side, it's letting
it take a crack at creating an optimized
schedule, labor optimization,
making sure I have the right people in
the seats for that uh that that
particular uh shift, uh the makeup of
skills and and licenses and
responsibilities and that sort of thing.
Oh, it's really interesting and it's um
it's uh it's it's
I think WFM has a bright future.
>> Absolutely. I think so, too.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> I I do too. And it's it's funny because
there you you just don't see a lot of
people coming into payroll and you don't
see a lot of people technology. I mean,
you know, building WFM solutions or
building payroll solutions cuz it's
really hard and it's it's stuff that
matters. And we we always talk about
from a WFM standpoint, we talk about
zero to gross. I don't care what you're
using for your gross to net engine. You
could have the best gross to engine in
the world. If your zero to gross is
flawed or wrong or giving you the wrong
information, it's going to be wrong in
gross to net. If we can make sure that
your zero to gross is right, then it
takes less it takes more pressure off of
the gross to net engine and and it
ensures that moving down that pike that
the information is going to be correct.
If this is wrong, everything downstream
is going to be wrong.
>> Right. Right. Right. so important, so
imperative to get those those those um
those core those core functionalities uh
systems absolutely on point. Um Jim,
>> we could talk about this all day. I'm
certain of it, but we've reached the end
of the podcast. Um thank you so much for
being a guest today, Jim.
>> It's my pleasure, Brent. I really
appreciate you having me on.
>> Thanks for tuning in to the future of
workforce management and payroll
insights by hr.com. We hope today's
episode brought you valuable insights
and fresh perspectives on the future of
payroll and workforce management. Be
sure to check out more episodes and
explore resources at hr.com/mpodcast
or wherever you listen to podcasts.
Until next time, keep innovating and
making a difference in the world of
payroll and workforce management.